He was a mighty man.
He felt the heroes of the enemy.
He slayed a giant, he even killed a lion,
and his name was not David.
Who was he?
Open your Bibles with me, please, to the book of First Chronicles, chapter 11.
First Chronicles, chapter 11, and verse 22.
Beniah, the son of Jehoyada, was a courageous man who performed many exploits in Kabzeh.
He struck down the two sons of Ariel of Moab,
and he descended into a water pit on a snowy day and killed a lion.
He also struck down an Egyptian man of extraordinary size, five qubits tall.
Though the Egyptian had a spear in his hand like the beam of loom workers,
he went against him with a rod and snatched the spear away from the Egyptian's hand and killed him with his own spear.
He is Beniah.
Look at all we learn about him in these verses.
The qualities that Beniah displayed.
It tells us in verse 22, he was a courageous man.
He performed many exploits in Kabzeh.
Kabzeh is a small place on the very southern border of Judah.
It borders Adam, the middle of nowhere.
But Beniah worked there.
He was happy to be there.
It may be that that was his home, or it may be that that was his assignment.
No matter as obscure place as Kabzeh is, that's where he worked.
And the record says he performed many exploits courageously in Kabzeh.
He killed a lion, courage.
But do you notice he descended into a water pit and killed a lion.
Courage descended into a water pit with a lion.
There's only one coming out.
And it was Beniah.
He descended into a water pit on a snowy day.
Wait for the sun to shine.
He knew that was the day.
Adverse conditions?
No matter.
Beniah went in, and he slayed the lion.
Look at verse 23, some more amazing qualities.
He struck down the giant in Egyptian of extraordinary size.
But notice, though the Egyptian had a spear in his hand like the beam of loom workers,
he, Beniah went against him with a rod.
A rod, a stick.
He didn't have the right equipment.
Adaptability, commitment.
And notice this, what does he do?
It says he went against him with a rod and snatched the spear away from the Egyptian's hand and killed him with his own spear.
Courage, commitment, adaptability, resourcefulness, admirable, beneficial qualities.
Are those the qualities that distinguished Beniah?
Not entirely.
There was one quality that exceeded these.
And that quality was loyalty.
Tenacious adherence to the person of Jehovah.
That's what the Bible record reveals about Beniah.
Personal loyalty to Jehovah.
There is a caution, though, with loyalty.
The demarcation between loyalty to Jehovah and loyalty to self can often be blurry.
It hides under the inertia of imperfection and selfishness.
That line of loyalty to Jehovah versus loyalty to self can become very difficult to see.
In fact, loyalty to self can lie dormant within us until the circumstances arise and change, and then it can emerge.
And Beniah and his contemporaries provide for us a beautiful contrast in loyalty to Jehovah and loyalty to self.
Think of Beniah. He lived in a very tumultuous time.
David was a fugitive with his mighty men, one of them likely was Beniah and others.
These men were comrades in arms running with David. They were a band of brothers.
They were fiercely loyal to David and to be sure they were loyal to Jehovah as well.
For example, among these three mighty men were three brothers, fleshly brothers.
They're mentioned in verses 20 and 26.
Joab, Abashai, and Azahel.
Now consider when circumstances changed for the mighty men.
When Saul died, and David now became king.
In these changing circumstances, what happened to the mighty men?
Here's the contrast. Joab and Beniah.
What happened to Joab?
Joab saw opportunity in changing circumstances.
And his loyalty to Jehovah was eclipsed by his loyalty to himself.
For instance, it was Joab who took matters into his own hands.
And he killed Abner, with whom David had already concluded a covenant.
He took matters into his own hands. Why? He wanted Abner's job.
His selfish ambitions got the better of him, and they eclipsed his loyalty to Jehovah.
Joab was a courageous man. He was resourceful. He was adaptable, admirable qualities.
But in the absence of deep personal loyalty to Jehovah, they seem somehow tainted, don't they?
But consider Beniah in the same circumstances.
Beniah had no part in these kind of intrigues, like Joab and his brothers.
Beniah was loyal to Jehovah, and he was a loyal man to Jehovah's anointed one.
David? And look at what we find in verses 24 and 25.
Verses 24 and 25.
These things, Beniah, the son of Jehovah did.
And he had a reputation like that of the three mighty warriors.
Although he was distinguished even more than the 30, he did not attain to the rank of the three.
However, David appointed him over his own bodyguard.
You see, in the same circumstances as Joab, Beniah's tenacious adherence to Jehovah,
his deep personal loyalty to Jehovah, safeguarded him in these circumstances.
What did David see in Beniah?
David saw in Beniah what he himself exemplified, and that was deep and strong personal loyalty to Jehovah.
You can see that in this verse in verse 25, can't you?
It says, however, David appointed him over his own bodyguard.
David knew to assign someone to this very, very trusted position, head of his own bodyguard,
the man in that position, if he was loyal to Jehovah, he would be loyal to him.
And that's what David saw in Beniah.
Then came another time of change, decades later, when David died and Solomon became king,
changed to circumstances, another time of opportunity, how would Beniah react?
The same way he always did, deep personal loyalty to Jehovah.
And it was Solomon when he became king, who rewarded Beniah.
The son of David, Solomon, Jehovah's anointed, rewarded Beniah for his loyalty.
Turn with me, please, to Proverbs 19, verse 22.
You see, Solomon knew something about loyalty.
He was the son of David, and look at what he wrote about loyalty in Proverbs 19, verse 22.
Solomon said, the desirable thing in man is his loyal love, his loyalty.
That's what Jehovah looks for in us.
So Beniah, he was indeed a mighty man, and he had beautiful qualities.
Did they distinguish him? Not entirely.
It was his deep personal loyalty to Jehovah, first and foremost, that distinguished him.
And because of that deep personal loyalty to Jehovah, those qualities of Beniahs, they were beautiful.
So daily cultivate your loyalty to God through prayer and study.
That's been your training here.
Use your training to develop your close personal loyalty to Jehovah.
That's what Beniah did.
Think of Beniah's training. He was the son of Jehojada.
Jehojada was one of the chief Levitical priests in Israel.
Beniah was raised with scrolls, not with swords, growing up the son of a priest that was his training.
So like Beniah, be willing to do the work without the rank.
Remember, loyalty is tested not when you are at ease.
Loyalty is tested under adversity.
So be careful in changing circumstances.
Guard your hearts.
Dear students, you all have beautiful qualities. We've seen them over the last five months.
But may loyalty, may your deep personal loyalty to Jehovah, distinguish you.